GEP 1709: initial implementation ideas (#1754)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: site-src/geps/gep-1709.md

## API

The API for conformance profiles will be a pipeline that implementations can
opt into. The workflow is effectively:

1. select a [profile](#profiles)
2. [integrate](#integration) tests in the downstream project
3. [report results and get certified](#certification)

The goal is to make selecting a conformance profile as simple of a process as

> feasible and support both the existing command line integration approach as well

Reviewer: what is the existing command line approach? 
`go test  ......`?

Author: Yes that's correct, we can add that here:

```suggestion
feasible and support both the existing command line integration approach (e.g. `go test`) as well
```

as a [Golang][go] approach using the conformance suite as a library.

[go]:https://go.dev

### Profiles

Initially there will be three _categories_ of profiles which can be coupled with
two _support levels_. These will be identified by short [CamelCase][camelcase]
names. The initial categories we'll support will be:

- `Layer4`
- `Layer7`
- `Mesh`

> **NOTE**: these are simply the initial categories we're going to start with,
> it's entirely reasonable for there to be more in the future.

Support levels will be limited to `Core` and `Extended`, since

> `ImplementationSpecific` isn't meaningful in conformance at the time of

Reviewer: There are some impls that support experimental features, like istio and envoy-gw. 
Whats the additional cost of providing the profile for them to be able to include these tests?

Author: In my first pass thinking through this I honestly didn't really think experimental features needed any special recognition, as they have a special nature that makes them off the normal course of the project's feature scope. That said, if there's some strong feelings we need to represent _experimental feature support_ visibly at a high level with conformance profiles I am open to that, I'm just not quite convinced yet :thinking:

Author: After talking with @LiorLieberman in a video call, the entire concept of how you refer to profiles has been reworked to incorporate providing a positive (or negative) list of additional features so this should be set now.

    GatewayClassName: "acme",
    Profile: Layer7CoreProfile,
    // other options
})
require.NoError(t, err, "misconfigured conformance test suite")
cSuite.Setup(t)

for i := 0; i < len(tests.ConformanceTests); i++ {
    test := tests.ConformanceTests[i]
    test.Run(t, cSuite)
}
```

> **NOTE**: In the `suite.Options` above it's still possible to add `SkipTests`
> but when used in conjunction with `Profile` this will result in a report that
> the profile is not valid for reporting. Implementations in this state may be
> able to report themselves as "in progress", see the
> [certification section](#certification) for details.

Alternatively for an `Extended` conformance profile where not all of the
features are implemented (as described in the [profiles](#profiles) section
above):

```console
$ go test ./conformance/... -args \
    -gateway-class=acme \
    -conformance-profile=Layer7Extended \
    -unsupported-features=HTTPResponseHeaderModification,HTTPRouteMethodMatching,HTTPRouteQueryParamMatching,
```

Or the equivalent configuration using the Golang library:

```go
cSuite, err := suite.New(suite.Options{
    GatewayClassName: "acme",
    Profile: Layer7ExtendedProfile,

>     UnsupportedFeatures: sets.New(

Reviewer: Feels like we can combine `UnsupportedFeatures` and `SkipTests` to one field and have additional logic that checks whether this combined field is used with `Core` profile to check validity.

Author: I think `UnsupportedFeatures` and `SkipTests` need to be kept separate as `SkipTests` is particularly helpful _during_ the development process. E.g. someone could have partial support for a _feature_ but not all tests passing just yet and use `SkipTests` to disable the tests they're unable to fulfill just yet while they otherwise plan the work to fix it. We did literally this downstream at Kong and it was pretty convenient.

I'll consider this one resolved, but if you still feel there's more to do here please don't hesitate to unresolve and let me know if I've missed something or there's something else you feel needs changing.

> and run the conformance test suite using a container image and/or via a
> configuration file, however it was decided to hold off from doing any of
> those in this iteration to avoid it getting to big (see the
> [alternatives](#alternatives-considered) section for more thoughts).

Once an implementation has integrated with the conformance test suite, they can
move on to [certification](#certification) to report the results.

[go-test]:https://go.dev/doc/tutorial/add-a-test
[go]:https://go.dev
[lib]:https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/gateway-api@v0.6.1/conformance/utils/suite

### Certification

Implementations will be able to report their conformance testing results using
our [reporting process](#reporting-process). Implementations will be able to
visibly demonstrate their conformance results on their downstream projects and
repositories using our [certification process](#certification-process).

#### Reporting Process

When conformance tests complete a log message will be emitted:

```console
Success! Conformance profile "Layer7Extended" passed for version v0.7.0
The following extended features were not supported:
- HTTPResponseHeaderModification
- HTTPRouteQueryParamMatching
```

> For the above output upstream Gateway API can be provided the following report:

Reviewer: One thing I have not found in the doc is who is responsible for generating `ConformanceReport` from the log?

Reviewer: gw-api go library? 
a shell script?

I am thinking it will probably be the first one but probably worth calling it out

Author: I was actually thinking for the first iteration of this, these could just be manually edited as they have straightforward contents and need to go through a review process anyway. Let's make that more explicit:

```suggestion
For the above output upstream Gateway API can manually generate or update a report
in the following format:
```

> easily contacted when needed (e.g. for relevant release announcements
> regarding conformance, e.t.c.).

The implementation can compile its `ConformanceReport` and upload it to the
Gateway API project by creating a pull request. The file should be uploaded
to the following sub-directory:

```console
conformance/results/<organization>-<project>.yaml
```

> **NOTE**: the first time an implementation adds their report, they need
> to also add the Golang templating to compile that report into their section
> of the implementations page if that's not already been handled.

This will start the certification process which will result in the
implementation receiving a badge they can use on their project pages and/or
repositories which indicates their conformance levels and link to their
conformance reports in the upstream Gateway API website.

> **NOTE**: No verification process (to prevent intentionally incorrect
> conformance results) will be implemented at this time. We expect that this wont
> be an issue in our community and even if someone were to try and "cheat" on
> the reporting the reputation loss for being caught would make them look very
> bad and would not be worth it.

> #### Certification Process

Reviewer: for this iteration, should we consider any kind of visualisation of conformance reports and/or badges other than looking into `conformance/results/<organization>-<project>.yaml` files?

Reviewer: I think its better to keep it for future iterations but maybe worth adding a reference here

Author: I think that would be good, however I'm not sure _what_ that should look like yet. I'm actually hoping that someone else will swoop in and think up a display layer using the raw data laid out so far.

Author: I added a TODO comment to the document that says we must figure this out _BEFORE_ we consider this `implementable`. That way we don't have to hold up this iteration just for that bit. :+1:

During the process of the pull request described in the reporting process the
implementer will be expected to run a command to compile updates before the
pull request will be allowed to merge:

```console
make conformance.reports
```

Any updates will be compiled (via Golang templates) and will then be submitted
as a commit in the pull request.

The conformance report will emit a heading that displays the latest release
version which conformance has been reported for, along with a note about any
newer releases which have yet to be reported.

CI will provide [badges](https://shields.io) to contributors upon completion.

> **NOTE**: Badges which cover `Extended` support (such as `Layer7Extended`)
> will look the same regardless of whether the implementation only fulfills
> the extended feature set partially. The badge links will direct to the full

> > report, which will include a list of any feature exceptions.

Reviewer: maybe a different colour for semi implemented Extended support?

Author: I'm open to doing something like this in the future if implementers complain about it... but I feel like extended is a completely reasonable place to have some features but not all.

  language to run the test suite on any platform [Golang][go] supports.
- Using the conformance test suite as a [Golang library][lib] within an already
  existing test suite.

> **NOTE**: Usage as a library is already an established colloquialism in the
> community, this effort simply intends to make that more official.

Selected conformance profiles can be identified as arguments in either
configuration. For instance using the command line interface method to run the
`Layer7Core` profile to verify core feature conformance:

```console
$ go test ./conformance/... -args -gateway-class=acme -conformance-profile=Layer7Core
```

Or the equivalent configuration using the Golang library:

```go
cSuite, err := suite.New(suite.Options{
    GatewayClassName: "acme",
    Profile: Layer7CoreProfile,
    // other options
})
require.NoError(t, err, "misconfigured conformance test suite")
cSuite.Setup(t)

for i := 0; i < len(tests.ConformanceTests); i++ {
    test := tests.ConformanceTests[i]
    test.Run(t, cSuite)
}
```

> **NOTE**: In the `suite.Options` above it's still possible to add `SkipTests`
> but when used in conjunction with `Profile` this will result in a report that

> > the profile is not valid for reporting. Implementations in this state may be

Reviewer 2: why not add a section in the report highlighting what was `Skipped` ?

Author: My intention here was to _never_ report conformance when tests are explicitly skipped, instead making `SkipTests` a tool for the development phase. Can you help me to understand the value you see in allowing reporting where entire tests are skipped, even if they might have been required? In the case of extended where we know some _features_ may not be fully supported, wouldn't `UnsupportedFeatures` adequately cover things here?

Reviewer 2: `SkipTests` are fewer, more fine grained tests, within `SupportedFeatures`, that the project cannot support either due to a bug in the project or due to API clarification. Here the setting in [Envoy Gateway](https://github.com/envoyproxy/gateway/blob/afe646b84d03cf4126f55721589850dc202dc130/test/conformance/conformance_test.go#L50). 

With above decision, Envoy Gateway would continue to run all tests, except some with SkipTests (temporarily until issues are fixed), but would not be able to generate any report

Author: Right, I think we're kinda saying the same thing. But where I was kinda coming from, is that if you're _skipping tests_ then this basically means you're **not** conformant. I'm a little confused about having a reporting option for implementations which are not yet conformant, but I guess I could be persuaded? :thinking:

Reviewer 2: Sure from a reporting standpoint, you can mark it as `not` conformant :)
From an implementation perspective, we prefer this approach to ensure more test coverage and minimal regression
TLDR, would prefer if the reporting tool marks the specific features (whose tests are skipped) as non conformant rather than fail reporting for other features too

Reviewer 2: The conformance tests run in CI in EG to prevent regression as well as report conformance (e.g. X feature tests pass). Earlier I was thinking we could this plug into the CI and run the tests once , so the report is generated on every PR run, so EG would replace this suite flag `EnableAllSupportedFeatures: true,` with `Profile: Layer4CoreProfile,Layer4ExtendedProfile,Layer7CoreProfile,Layer7ExtendedProfile`. 

But thinking more on this, the conformance profile tests might need to run as a separate task who's job is to only report conformance rather than use the exit code of the process to decide whether CI is passing or not (catch regression).

Author: So it just occurred to me a couple days ago, I had already added a note about being able to explicitly report "in progress" conformance via this process:

https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/1754/files#diff-7764ccb47f68a80348b14a2c6df6c6cadd80db02de7817dbcb8039a611bf1328R130

Also I've removed the support levels on the profiles in favor of a nested reporting structure. If I'm understanding what you were asking for, I think this will provide the facility you were looking for. If not, please mark this unresolved and let me know!

cSuite, err := suite.New(suite.Options{
    GatewayClassName: "acme",
    Profile: Layer7CoreProfile,
    // other options
})
require.NoError(t, err, "misconfigured conformance test suite")
cSuite.Setup(t)

for i := 0; i < len(tests.ConformanceTests); i++ {
    test := tests.ConformanceTests[i]
    test.Run(t, cSuite)
}
```

> **NOTE**: In the `suite.Options` above it's still possible to add `SkipTests`
> but when used in conjunction with `Profile` this will result in a report that
> the profile is not valid for reporting. Implementations in this state may be
> able to report themselves as "in progress", see the
> [certification section](#certification) for details.

Alternatively for an `Extended` conformance profile where not all of the
features are implemented (as described in the [profiles](#profiles) section
above):

```console
$ go test ./conformance/... -args \
    -gateway-class=acme \
    -conformance-profile=Layer7Extended \
    -unsupported-features=HTTPResponseHeaderModification,HTTPRouteMethodMatching,HTTPRouteQueryParamMatching,
```

Or the equivalent configuration using the Golang library:

```go
cSuite, err := suite.New(suite.Options{
    GatewayClassName: "acme",

>     Profile: Layer7ExtendedProfile,

Reviewer 3: can I be L7 and L4 at the same time?

Reviewer 3: And mesh eventually

Author: There's a note about this concept here: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/c6b5417042119e6d3e1b023c9ffd92935706f2f3/site-src/geps/gep-1709.md?plain=1#L103

I'll consider this one resolved, but if you feel like this is insufficient and you want to see more change I would definitely invite you to mark it unresolved and let me know what changes you feel are needed.

Reviewer 3: I am not worried about the reporting but about the test running. Unless the tests for each profile are completely isolated so running all of them together vs running each profile in sequence is the ~same?

Reviewer 2: what about adding the ability to input a list of supported Profiles ?

Reviewer 2: looks good, thanks !
